src/data/supplemental-pages/jobs.md, before:

---
title: Jobs at Unison Computing
description: Available roles at Unison Computing, the company
slug: jobs
---

> Our mission: advance what's possible with software and work to make software creation simpler and more accessible to all.

# Working at Unison Computing

Unison Computing is a seed stage startup and a [public benefit corp](/2020/03/30/benefit-corp-report/). You can read more about the company's background and our mission [in this post](/2020/03/30/benefit-corp-report/). See the [Unison Strange Loop talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCWtkvDQ2ZI) for an introduction to the core ideas behind Unison and also [the Unison documentation site](https://unisonweb.org/docs) for more about the Unison language.

We love statically-typed functional languages such as Elm, PureScript, Scala, Haskell, and Unison itself. We hope that you'll be excited to learn about them if you haven't already.

We're committed to building a friendly, welcoming, and diverse community of Unison programmers, and it's important to us that you'd commit to this as well.

And probably the most important thing we are looking for: enthusiasm for making computing better, a belief that the (computing) world is what we make of it, and an ability and willingness to learn whatever is necessary to make a new vision of computing a reality. Regardless of your past experience, you will often find yourself in uncharted territory. We think that's part of the fun and hope you will too!

### Logistics

We are based in [Somerville, MA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Davis_Square), but we are a remote-first company and nobody has even been to the office since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Our hiring is not limited to United States based applicants. Although we ask that some working hours overlap with a 9-5 [ET](https://www.timeanddate.com/time/zones/et) work day, we also recognize that our team members are also parents, hobbyists, family members, and community members, and we are happy that our flexibility allows us to flourish both professionally and personally. 

The company offers competitive benefits, paid parental leave, and a vacation policy that emphasizes work/life balance.

### Open Positions

Even when we're not trying to fill a specific position—and though we usually aren't—we love to hear from folks who are excited about what we're trying to accomplish and want to help make it happen.  So check out the _How to Apply_ section, drop us a line, and we'll contact you first whenever we do have an opening that seems like a good fit.

That said, we are actively looking for a...

#### Software Engineer (Haskell)

The Unison Codebase Manager is the core tool that Unison programmers use when writing and exploring Unison code. It's responsible for things like storing Unison's unique code format, managing code dependencies, and surfacing information to the programmer about their codebase's state. It's written in Haskell, and we quite frankly need more hands to develop it into the nicest developer experience imaginable.  

Some of the things we need help with, in addition to designing and adding new functionality, include: 
  * improving execution times or memory footprint, 
  * helping to figure out how to provide great error messages (and other interactions) for Unison developers, 
  * improving abstractions in Haskell code to improve readability and accelerate new development, 
  * developing open-source libraries or applications in Unison in your domains of choice,

and whatever else we can come up with together to make the Unison language, tools, and ecosystem a joy to use.  

You'll be joining a very small team and would have an active role in helping determine what we build next and how we build it. Bring your algorithms, networking, design, security, database, open-source, and interpersonal skills, because we want all of it.

### How to Apply

Send an email to jobs@unison.cloud. Here's what to include:

- Tell us who you are and why you want to work on Unison.
- Include your résumé/CV or a link to it (LinkedIn is fine).
- If you have any past work that you'd like to share with us—open-source projects, publications, talks, articles, blog posts; or something else you're proud of—we'd love to see it!
- Let us know where you are currently based.
- What questions do you have about the role?

We look forward to hearing from you!

*Paul, Rúnar, Arya*

Commit message:

Take down Haskell engineer job posting

src/data/supplemental-pages/jobs.md, after:

---
title: Jobs at Unison Computing
description: Available roles at Unison Computing, the company
slug: jobs
---

> Our mission: advance what's possible with software and work to make software creation simpler and more accessible to all.

# Working at Unison Computing

Unison Computing is a seed stage startup and a [public benefit corp](/2020/03/30/benefit-corp-report/). You can read more about the company's background and our mission [in this post](/2020/03/30/benefit-corp-report/). See the [Unison Strange Loop talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCWtkvDQ2ZI) for an introduction to the core ideas behind Unison and also [the Unison documentation site](https://unisonweb.org/docs) for more about the Unison language.

We love statically-typed functional languages such as Elm, PureScript, Scala, Haskell, and Unison itself. We hope that you'll be excited to learn about them if you haven't already.

We're committed to building a friendly, welcoming, and diverse community of Unison programmers, and it's important to us that you'd commit to this as well.

And probably the most important thing we are looking for: enthusiasm for making computing better, a belief that the (computing) world is what we make of it, and an ability and willingness to learn whatever is necessary to make a new vision of computing a reality. Regardless of your past experience, you will often find yourself in uncharted territory. We think that's part of the fun and hope you will too!

### Logistics

We are based in [Somerville, MA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Davis_Square), but we are a remote-first company and nobody has even been to the office since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Our hiring is not limited to United States based applicants. Although we ask that some working hours overlap with a 9-5 [ET](https://www.timeanddate.com/time/zones/et) work day, we also recognize that our team members are also parents, hobbyists, family members, and community members, and we are happy that our flexibility allows us to flourish both professionally and personally. 

The company offers competitive benefits, paid parental leave, and a vacation policy that emphasizes work/life balance.

### Open Positions

We're not currently looking to hire for any roles right now, but even when we're not trying to fill a specific position, we love to hear from folks who are excited about what we're trying to accomplish and want to help make it happen.  So check out the _How to Apply_ section, drop us a line, and we'll contact you first whenever we do have an opening that seems like a good fit.

### How to Apply

Send an email to jobs@unison.cloud. Here's what to include:

- Tell us who you are and why you want to work on Unison.
- Include your résumé/CV or a link to it (LinkedIn is fine).
- If you have any past work that you'd like to share with us—open-source projects, publications, talks, articles, blog posts; or something else you're proud of—we'd love to see it!
- Let us know where you are currently based.
- What questions do you have about the role?

We look forward to hearing from you!

*Paul, Rúnar, Arya*
